[Music]
have you ever gazed out at the night sky
and been fascinated by the bright band
of stars that lights it up that's the
Milky Way and over there is the Mars bar
hey the sky is full of candy bars nope
just kidding
the Milky Way is really the galaxy where
our Sun hangs out and the Sun is not the
only star in the Milky Way and the Milky
Way is not the only galaxy in the
universe astronomers have long since
been in the quest to find out exactly
how many galaxies there are in the
universe and you won't believe the
numbers they've come up with with time
as humans progressed the scope of what
we consider the universe also advanced
first we thought that the earth we live
on the Sun the moon and the stars that
we could see with our naked eyes made up
the entire universe
so effectively for a large part of human
history we considered the Milky Way to
be the only universe we thought that all
the stars that we see belong to it this
belief didn't change until the 1900s
when scientists like Henrietta Swan
Leavitt and Edwin Hubble identified
stars whose brightness seemed to change
when observed from the earth they called
these the variable stars Leavitt had
intensely studied thousands of variable
stars she found that certain stars
called Cepheid variables had the same
brightness if they twinkle at the same
speed
this discovery proved to be a milestone
in measuring the distance of stars and
galaxies it provided a way to relate
brightness to distance then came Hubble
who using the hooker telescope at Mount
Wilson Observatory in California
identified several of these variable
stars he then used some complex
mathematics to calculate the distance of
these stars his calculations showed that
these stars were way too distant to
belong to our galaxy so he concluded
that they must be members of some other
faraway galaxies and not the Milky Way
this discovery motivated astronomers to
find out exactly how many galaxies are
out there in the universe do
this mission more and more powerful
telescopes were developed today we have
telescopes both on the ground and in
outer space that regularly stare into
the vast universe to detect the faintest
and most distant galaxies a major
contributor to this quest and towards
making astronomy popular is the hubble
space telescope named after famous
astronomer Edwin Hubble this telescope
was launched into the low Earth orbit in
1990 and remains operational it tried to
investigate deep space for the first
time in 1995 the image that the
telescope captured is known as the
Hubble Deep Field and in it scientists
could identify 3000 distinct galaxies
similar deep observations using the
Hubble and other telescopes followed its
success and they found even more
galaxies using these experiments
scientists determined that there are
about 125 billion galaxies but that
large number appears faint compared to
what scientists would discover a few
years later in 2016 a study conducted by
a team of astronomers led by an
astrophysicist from the University of
Nottingham used 3d modeling of images
collected over 20 years by the hubble
space telescope to determine the number
of galaxies what they found was
startling
according to them there are over two
trillion galaxies these galaxies lie in
what is known as the observable universe
the observable universe is the part of
the universe that can be seen from Earth
or from space-based telescopes like the
Hubble right now it's 93 billion light
years in diameter these galaxies are
those from which light has reached us
since the beginning of the universe
have we blown your mind yet well hang on
improve technology and finding the light
that's not visible to human eyes has now
made it possible for us to reveal
galaxies that couldn't be detected by
Hubble these galaxies mostly lie in an
area called the zone of avoidance that
is the region in the sky that's obscured
by
Milkyway the farthest galaxies that
we've been able to observe till now is
named EGS zx81 I think we should
nickname it Bob it's so far out that
light from there took a little over 13
billion years to reach us we studied in
our physics class that we can't see an
object until it's light reaches us and
although light travels extremely fast it
still takes time to cover such long
distances for example the light from our
Sun which is just about 93 million miles
away from the earth takes 8 minutes and
20 seconds to get here and so if the
light from the nearest star Alpha
Centauri takes more than 4 years to
reach us
it means we're seeing that star for
years in the past the light you see from
your computer or your smartphone screen
is just nanoseconds all so now let's go
back to the farthest known galaxy the
EGS zx81 or Bob since its light took
about 13 billion years to reach us it
means that what we see of this galaxy
today is how the galaxy looked about 13
billion years ago long before the earth
or even our Sun came into existence the
discovery of such galaxies has helped
astronomers to understand how the
universe began and how its evolved since
then it's now generally accepted that
the universe is about 13.8 billion years
old so the galaxy we call Bob is
certainly one of the earliest galaxies
to have formed in the cosmos looking at
it is like looking at the universe is
past a very fascinating and yet
sometimes confusing aspect of the
universe is that its size is not
permanent instead it's been growing ever
since it was created by the Big Bang and
the further an object is from us the
faster it's moving away from us so by
the time light from a faraway galaxy
reaches us the same galaxy has already
moved
they're away this makes it difficult to
calculate the actual distance of faraway
galaxies because by the time we see them
the distance has changed so according to
some complex calculations the most
distant galaxy is about 32 billion
light-years away from us now and is
still moving away from us picking up
speed as it goes the expanding universe
Theory also means that there's a point
in the universe from which things are
moving away from us at a speed faster
than the speed of light a point beyond
which given our current scientific
knowledge and technology we can't
investigate this is a place from where
light can never reach us the enormous
blue star nicknamed Icarus is the
farthest individual star we've seen
today normally it would have been too
faint to view even with the largest and
most powerful telescopes that we have
today but it seems like nature wanted us
to have a look at it it was because of a
fluke of nature that the Stars weak glow
got extremely bright astronomers using
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope were
therefore able to pinpoint this faraway
star and set a new distance record the
star is in a very distant spiral galaxy
it's so far away that it's light took
nine billion years to reach Earth all
these discoveries have been amazing but
scientists are never satisfied with what
they know or have they have an
unquenchable thirst to know and develop
new things so to look at objects far far
away and more difficult to be detected
by telescopes they developed an
observation network in the Netherlands
that can see light sources that regular
telescopes can't this newer telescope
works by detecting radiation produced by
the interaction of huge cosmic objects
this telescope network is called
low-frequency array or LOFAR over 200
scientists from 18 different countries
teamed in an awe-inspiring study using
radio astronomy to analyze a tiny
section of sky above the northern
hemisphere during this experiment they
were able to identify 300
new galaxies but even with such advanced
systems scientists say that they've only
been able to chart 2% of the sky so far
the team of scientists now plan to sift
their eyes on the entire northern sky
they hope to be able to discover many
more new galaxies that can shed light on
various other research areas including
the physics of black holes as well as
research into how galaxies clusters
evolve but will we stop with the LOFAR
systems obviously not if there's been
something constant in the evolution of
humans it's the fact that we've always
made progress and with time the rate of
this progress has only sped up the
universe as I see it is far vaster than
we can ever discover but it surely
doesn't discourage those searching it'll
only make them push harder it wouldn't
surprise me if someday soon we discover
even more galaxies at even farther
distances what about you do you think we
will discover more galaxies than we have
till now before the end of the decade
let me know down in the comments if you
learn something new today then give this
video a like and share it with a friend
but hey don't go star trekking just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out right here on earth all you
have to do is pick the left or right
video click on it and enjoy stay on the
bright side of life